---
date: 2025-06-06T09:50:00
title: NCCC170 Business meeting
---
Announcements:

-	Thank you to our local host Julia Piaskowski and program chair Conor Fair
-	Welcome to new NCCC170 members: Daniel Palmer (StatCraft), Heike Hofmann (UNL)
-	NCCC170 website https://nccc170.org has links including member profiles: check it out!
    - Thanks to Jarad Niemi and Aaron Rendahl for website design and maintenance, respectively
    - Reminder: any new members or changes to profile details should be shared with Aaron Rendahl (or through Google sheet)
-	Preparation of 2024-2025 annual report
    - Deadline August 6, 2025
    - Request for information on papers, presentations, awards, etc.
        - From: July 1, 2024 to June 30, 2025
    - Template: 2023-2024 annual report available at https://nimss.org/seas/52566 
    - Use Google docs to expedite reporting: link to be shared
    - Check email for reminders of deadlines and specific instructions to submit report

Old Business:

-	[NCCC170 2021-2026 project objectives](../objectives) | [link to NIMSS](https://nimss.org/projects/view/mrp/outline/18798)
    - Please read through these materials shared by Nora beforehand via email
        - Statement of Issues and Justification
        - Objectives
        - Procedures and Activities
        - Expected Outcomes and Impact
          
New Business:

-	Project renewal: 2026-2031 with specific objectives to address over the next five years
    - Proposal Committee
        - Bruce Craig, Nora Bello(?), Alex Lipka(?)
    - Discussion/Updates on Objectives, Expected Outcomes, etc.
        - Ideas previously mentioned: ML and AI applications
        - Next steps of the GLMM joint effort
-	Future NCCC170 Meeting
    - Location: Neil Paton (Cargill) has volunteered to host 2026 meeting in Ohio (Dayton area)
    - Dates to be determined
    - Program Chair volunteers?
    - Any interest in host for 2027 meeting?
    - New Secretary? – Nora’s position in limbo, volunteers?
-	Group picture

Adjourn Meeting at Noon.
