---
date: 2019-06-21T08:30:00
title: 'Ordination plots for model-based analysis of species composition data: Connecting
  two very different sets of methods'
authors:
- philipdixon
authors_display:
- '{{% mention_name "philipdixon" "Philip Dixon" %}}*, Department of Statistics, Iowa
  State University'
---
Traditional analysis of species composition data starts by computing a dissimilarity between each pair of samples.  These dissimilarities are the basis for ordination plots, which explore patterns, and ANOVA-like inference.  The more recent model-based analysis of species composition starts with an explicit probability model for the data.  This provides a principled approach for inference but it has been difficult to produce an ordination plot.  Often, a traditional ordination method is combined with a model-based analysis, but these make different assumptions about the data.  I develop an approach to visualizing multivariate species composition that is consistent with a model-based analysis, in the sense that the plot and the analysis make the same assumptions.  This approach retains the data distribution from a model-based analysis and makes no additional assumptions about the structure of the data.  

The probability model is used to define a likelihood-based dissimilarity between each pair of observations.  I derive these for Bernoulli (i.e., presence/absence) data, four models for count data, and Gaussian data.  An ordination plot is constructed by multidimensional scaling.  The approach can be extended to overlay model-based predictions of species composition on the ordination plot or compute a community-level residual.   I illustrate these using nesting bird counts on Skokholm Island and tropical tree stem counts on Barro Colorado Island.
